People might seem unpredictable, much in the same way the weather is unpredictable at detail. This is because many things control the behavior of a person, making them chaotic systems, as in Chaos Theory. But inside the mind, at small scales, there are many simpler mechanisms, which are self-sufficient and highly deterministic, that solve very specific and particular problems in someone's life. The interaction between them produces complex behavior like consciousness through an emergent pattern.

And although you can't guess the decisions or state of mind of someone individually in a moment-by-moment, you can study groups and populations in relation special circumstances to find [[consistency|consistent]] and [[Repeatability|repeatable]] patterns. For example, what produces crime, or what leads to happiness.

Free will is a myth. Most of our life is driven by our body, which responds to the environment, which are mostly things a given person hasn't caused and can't control. The conscious mind is observer experiencing life and selecting what parts of the environment to pay attention to. There is a menu of options in life of what to choose next, but what entries appear on the menu are out of one's control and are often unpredictable.

One of the human instincts includes a sense of [[volition|self-determination]], which is what produces the illusion of free will. Although not real, much like self-preservation is an instinct that safeguards us from suicide when opportunity arises, this sensation is what safeguards us from complacency, enables us to be motivated in the things that need to be done, to question about purpose, define what happiness means and watch out opportunities for progress.

Regardless of something being an illusion, it usually exists for a good reason. And even though we don't have much choice in our actions, helping others increases the number of items in both your menus and allowing others to make their choice without coercion gives them the satisfaction necessary to stay cooperative and preserve your well-being. This is called Agency, as in personal agency.

Agency is the single most important factor in a person's life. We must do things such as we can increase our ability to choose and when we help others with the same, it has a retroactive effect. Cooperation is [[Synergy|synergetic]], enable things to get done that no people individually can do even if both working on the same problem. Whenever you remove Agency from someone that's the definition of [[Violence]].

People like to talk about duties and responsibilities, but forget that without agency, people are unable to feel responsible for what they do and are even unable to have autonomy, use the tools that are required to fulfill duties. This is a particularly prominent problem with children.

We are so afraid of getting children hurt, but at the same time haste for them to be successful, that we forget they can't do one thing without the other. This manifests in a child as a sense of lack of control of their lives, loss of interest to help or do anything that feels forced on them. They can't warrant feeling responsible. Being forced to feel responsible when you aren't given tools produces resentment and that leads to [[Trauma]]. It is how [[Depression and Anxiety]] in adulthood often lingers.

Giving children agency doesn't mean placing them in full autonomy and expecting them to be effective and productive in a stressful environment. The important difference between children and adults is that they haven't had opportunity to develop any competence or skills yet, so they are just [[Teaching and Learning|learning]]. The solution to this is the same even for adults who need to recover from mental illness.

You need to manufacture a valid and responsive environment with tolerance for plenty of mistakes without a person having to fear negative consequences. This can be a toy version of practical job. You need to support them when they take bad decisions, such as if the regret their decisions, you are able to help them to recover their losses and try again. The need to be allowed to experiment. This is agency and makes the person feel they can control their lives.